# Availability in System Design

- Availability refers to the proportion of time that a system or service is operational and accessible for use.

- It is a non functional requirement and critical aspect of system design, ensuring that users can access the system when needed without interruptions.

- Redundancy, fault tolerance, and effective recovery techniques are usually used to achieve high availability.

- Availability is measured as the percentage of time a system or service is operational and accessible to users over a specific period.

```
Availability (%) = ((Uptime) / (Uptime + Downtime)) * 100
```

- **Example**: If a system has an uptime of 99.9% over a month, it means it was unavailable for approximately 43.2 minutes during that period.


## Importance of Availability in System Design

1. **User Experience**: A positive user experience results from availability, guarantees that users can access the system and its services when needed.

2. **Service Level Agreements (SLAs)**: Many businesses use SLAs to bind themselves to certain availability goals with their stakeholders or consumers.

3. **Competitive Advantage**: Businesses can use high availability as a distinction in the marketplace, attracting customers who prioritize reliability.

4. **Disaster Recovery**: Resilience and disaster recovery are directly linked to availability. A system that is designed for high availability can quickly recover from failures, minimizing downtime and data loss.

5. **Business Continuity**: In order to ensure ongoing operations and business continuity, availability is important.

---
```
Note: Asset Reliability/ Availability is the ability of individual components or assets (e.g., servers, databases, or hardware) to perform their tasks without failure.
```
--- 

## Strategies for Achieving High Availability 

- **Redundancy**: Implementing redundant components, such as servers, databases, and network paths, ensures that if one component fails, others can take over without affecting the system's availability.

- **Load balancing**: Incoming requests are divided among several servers or resources to enhance system performance and fault tolerance while avoiding overload on any one part.

- **Disaster Recovery (DR)**: Establishing disaster recovery plans and backup systems to quickly restore services in the event of a failure or disaster.

- **Failover mechanisms**: Implementing automated processes to detect failures and switch to redundant systems without manual intervention.

- **Monitoring and Alerting**: Continuous monitoring of system health and performance, with alerting mechanisms to notify administrators of potential issues before they lead to downtime.

- **Performance optimization**: lowering the possibility of bottlenecks and breakdowns by making sure the system is built and adjusted to efficiently manage the expected load.


## Real World Examples of High Availability

- **Amazon Web Services (AWS)**:
    - Offers 99.99% availability SLAs for core services (e.g., S3, RDS Multi-AZ).

- **Google Cloud**:
    - Uses global load balancing and automatic failover to keep services up even during regional outages.

- **Netflix**: 
    - Multi-region deployments with Chaos Engineering to ensure fault tolerance.

- **Banking Systems** (e.g., Visa, Mastercard):
    - Require "Five Nines" availability (99.999%) because downtime directly impacts transactions worldwide.
